What is event data modeling?
Converting event data to
logical aggregates using business logic is called event data modeling.
Event data modeling helps us answer business question.
We'll understand this with an example.
For a mobile game,
we are tracking the following add events, ad_click and ad_close.
We want to analyze add location data to influence our ad pricing strategy.
Along with user action,
we're also tracking event id,
date, time, and ad location.
Can you tell us which ad location is better source of revenue,
looking at this data? I think no.
Shall we put our event data modeling skills to use? Let's do that.
After aggregating data across different dimensions,
we get to this table.
Here you can see full-screen ads have the best click-through rate of 52 percent,
and bottom ribbon ads have worse, 35 percent.
Hence we can have tiered pricing for ads,
with full-screen being more expensive,
top ribbon location with middle tier pricing,
and bottom ribbon location having the lowest price.
What we did here is event modeling.
We aggregated event data using business logic to help us answer a business question.
KPIs and event data, key performance indicators.
A performance indicator is a type of performance measurement.
KPIs evaluate the success of an organization
or of a particular activity in which it engages.
Event data helps us measure KPIs of a product.
Let's look at few most popular KPIs project managers track.
Active users.
A user that is actively using your app or website is called an active user.
Websites generally track DAU,
daily active users, WAU,
weekly active users, MAU, monthly active users.
Project managers use this as a user growth KPI.
They may define targets around daily,
weekly, or monthly active users.
Let's assume you have Spotify on your phone and you have not opened it for months,
that means you are not an active user for those months.
Other users who open and spend some time on it every day,
they will be daily active users.
Next, session length.
Amount of time a user spends on the app or
website in one session is called session length.
It measures how much user is engaged with the content.
Let's talk about Pinterest.
If average session length has gone down over time,
Pinterest will have to evaluate why this is happening?
Is it because the quality of content has gone down
or is it because the UI or user experience is not as user friendly?
Click-through rate. These days,
websites and apps have ads running on them as one of the revenue streams.
The sites and the advertisers need to know how their ads are doing.
One such performance measure is click-through rate.
How many uses clicked on the ad or on the banner?
This will measure how many users were interested in the content,
or how many users found the content relevant.
Google will track click-through rate for all ads that are running on its search website.
This will clearly tell them how many users are finding the content relevant. Bounce rate.
Websites are built to attract users to either buy or to engage with the content.
Percentage of users leaving a website after viewing only one page is called bounce rate.
It measures the effectiveness of entry page.
If users just leave from the landing page or homepage of the website,
that indicates either we are not offering something that the user wants or
our content is bad quality or maybe our presentation of the content is bad.
If bounce rate of YouTube is high,
the whole purpose of the website gets defeated.
Users are not uploading videos,
watching videos, or engaging with the content.
For a YouTube product manager,
this will be alarming.
Conversion rate. This is the most important KPI for any website or app.
It is the percentage of users completing a desired action.
What is a desired action?
For an e-commerce website,
desired action could be a customer clicking "Buy" or "Confirm purchase button".
For other sites, it could be completing a registration form,
or downloading PDF, audio or video file.
Conversion rate measures users interests in the offering.
A simple example would be subscribing to a blog.
For a blogger, desired action is getting a loyal reader and measuring conversion
around that will be a good indicator of
the quality of their offering and the interest in it.
To sum it all,
we know what event data is,
how to use it,
and KPIs that can be tracked using event data.
If you have noticed,
you also know what event data producers are.
The event data producers are;
connected devices or IoT devices,
websites or mobile apps, sensors and systems.
Last but not the least, social media platforms,
and now you are an event data sorcerer;
you can do an event data spell on anyone.